HOWTO.md, before:

HOWTO - using the library with perf   {#howto_perf}
===================================

@brief This HOWTO explains how to use `perf` which has integrated openCSD.

#### March 3rd 2016

This HOWTO explains how to use the perf cmd line tools and the openCSD
library to collect and extract program flow traces generated by the 
CoreSight IP block on a Linux system.  The examples have been generated using
a aarch64 Juno-r1 platform.  All information is considered accurate and tested
using library branch `opencsd-bkk16` (decode library only) and perf update 
branch `perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16` (decode library + perf tools) on the 
[OpenCSD github repository][1].


On Target Trace Acquisition
---------------------------
The enhancement to the Perf tools that support the new `cs_etm` pmu have not
been upstreamed yet.  To get the required functionality branch
`perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bbk16` needs to be downloaded to the target system where
traces are to be collected.  This branch is an upstream v4.5-rc6 kernel
supplemented with modifications to the CoreSight framework and drivers to be
usable by the Perf core.  Some of those patches have been queued for merging in
the 4.6 cycle.  Others have been submitted and some have yet to be posted for
review.  The process is being done incrementally.

From there compiling the perf tools with `make -C tools/perf` will yield a
`perf` executable that will support CoreSight trace collection.  Note that if
traces are to be decompressed *off* target, there is no need to download and
compile the openCSD library (on the target).

Before launching a trace run a sink that will collect trace data needs to be
identified.  All CoreSight blocks identified by the framework are registed in
sysFS:


    linaro@linaro-nano:~$ ls /sys/bus/coresight/devices/
    20010000.etf   20040000.main_funnel  22040000.etm 22140000.etm  
    230c0000.A53_funnel  23240000.etm  replicator@20020000 20030000.tpiu
    20070000.etr 220c0000.A57_funnel  23040000.etm  23140000.etm 23340000.etm


CoreSight blocks are listed in the device tree for a specific system and
discovered at boot time.  Since tracers can be linked to more than one sink,
the sink that will recieve trace data needs to be identified manually.  In
In this example the ETR block is selected:

    root@linaro-nano:~# echo 1 > /sys/bus/coresight/devices/20070000.etr/enable_sink


- Note that selecting a trace sink prior to launching a trace run is only
temporary.  Work is currently underway to specify sink selection in the "perf
record" command.

Once a sink has been identify trace collection can start.  An easy and yet
interesting example is the `uname` command:

    linaro@linaro-nano:~/kernel$ ./tools/perf/perf record -e cs_etm// --per-thread uname

This will generate a `perf.data` file where execution has been traced for both
user and kernel space.  To narrow the field to either user or kernel space the
`u` and `k` options can be specified.  For example the following will limit
traces to user space:


    linaro@linaro-nano:~/kernel$ ./tools/perf/perf record -vvv -e cs_etm//u --per-thread uname
    Problems setting modules path maps, continuing anyway...
    -----------------------------------------------------------
    perf_event_attr:
      type                             8
      size                             112
      { sample_period, sample_freq }   1
      sample_type                      IP|TID|IDENTIFIER
      read_format                      ID
      disabled                         1
      exclude_kernel                   1
      exclude_hv                       1
      enable_on_exec                   1
      sample_id_all                    1
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    sys_perf_event_open: pid 11375  cpu -1  group_fd -1  flags 0x8
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    perf_event_attr:
      type                             1
      size                             112
      config                           0x9
      { sample_period, sample_freq }   1
      sample_type                      IP|TID|IDENTIFIER
      read_format                      ID
      disabled                         1
      exclude_kernel                   1
      exclude_hv                       1
      mmap                             1
      comm                             1
      enable_on_exec                   1
      task                             1
      sample_id_all                    1
      mmap2                            1
      comm_exec                        1
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    sys_perf_event_open: pid 11375  cpu -1  group_fd -1  flags 0x8
    mmap size 266240B
    AUX area mmap length 131072
    perf event ring buffer mmapped per thread
    Synthesizing auxtrace information
    Linux
    auxtrace idx 0 old 0 head 0x11ea0 diff 0x11ea0
    [ perf record: Woken up 1 times to write data ]
    overlapping maps:
     7f99daf000-7f99db0000 0 [vdso]
     7f99d84000-7f99db3000 0 /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/ld-2.21.so
     7f99d84000-7f99daf000 0 /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/ld-2.21.so
     7f99db0000-7f99db3000 0 /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/ld-2.21.so
    failed to write feature 8
    failed to write feature 9
    failed to write feature 14
    [ perf record: Captured and wrote 0.072 MB perf.data ]

    linaro@linaro-nano:~/kernel$ ls -l ~/.debug/ perf.data
    _-rw------- 1 linaro linaro 77888 Mar  2 20:41 perf.data

    /home/linaro/.debug/:
    total 16
    drwxr-xr-x 2 linaro linaro 4096 Mar  2 20:40 [kernel.kallsyms]
    drwxr-xr-x 2 linaro linaro 4096 Mar  2 20:40 [vdso]
    drwxr-xr-x 3 linaro linaro 4096 Mar  2 20:40 bin
    drwxr-xr-x 3 linaro linaro 4096 Mar  2 20:40 lib

On Target Trace Collection
--------------------------
The entire program flow will have been recorded in the `perf.data` file.
Information about libraries and executable is stored under `$HOME/.debug` . 
All this information needs to be collected in order to successfully decode
traces off target:

    linaro@linaro-nano:~/kernel$ tar czf uname.trace.tgz perf.data ~/.debug


Note that file `vmlinux` should also be added to the bundle if kernel traces
have also been collected.


Off Target OpenCSD Compilation
------------------------------
As of this writing the openCSD library is not part of the perf tools source.
It is available on [github][1] and needs to be compiled before perf.

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ git clone -b opencsd-bkk16 https://github.com/Linaro/OpenCSD.git opencsd-bkk16
    Cloning into 'OpenCSD'...
    remote: Counting objects: 2063, done.
    remote: Total 2063 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 2063
    Receiving objects: 100% (2063/2063), 2.51 MiB | 1.24 MiB/s, done.
    Resolving deltas: 100% (1399/1399), done.
    Checking connectivity... done.
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ ls opencsd-bkk16 
    decoder LICENSE  README.md

Once the source code has been acquired compilation of the openCSD library can
take place.  For Linux two options are available, LINUX and LINUX64, based on
the host's (which has nothing to do with the target) architecture:

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ cd opencsd-bkk16/decoder/build/linux/
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/opencsd-bkk16/decoder/build/linux/$ ls
    makefile  rctdl_c_api_lib  ref_trace_decode_lib

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/opencsd-bkk16/decoder/build/linux/$ make LINUX64=1 DEBUG=1 
    ...
    ...

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight//bkk16/opencsd-bkk16/decoder/build/linux/$ ls ../../lib/linux64/dbg/
    libcstraced.a  libcstraced_c_api.a  libcstraced_c_api.so  libcstraced.so 

Off Target Perf Tools Compilation
---------------------------------
As stated above not all the pieces of the solution have been upstreamed.  To
get all the components branch `perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16` needs to be
obtained:

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ git clone -b perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16 https://github.com/Linaro/OpenCSD.git perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16
    ...
    ...

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ ls perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/ 
    arch   certs    CREDITS  Documentation  firmware  include  ipc     Kconfig  lib          Makefile  net     REPORTING-BUGS  scripts   sound  usr
    block  COPYING  crypto   drivers        fs        init     Kbuild  kernel   MAINTAINERS  mm        README  samples         security  tools  virt       

At this point openCSD object files needs to be copied in the cs_etm decoder
directory.  After that a new perf tool binary can be compiled:

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ mkdir perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/tools/perf/util/cs-etm-decoder/lib 

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ cp opencsd-bkk16/decoder/lib/linux64/dbg/* perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/tools/perf/util/cs-etm-decoder/lib/

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ cd perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/$ export CSTRACE_PATH=~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/opencsd-bkk16/decoder
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/$ make -C tools/perf ARCH=arm DEBUG=1 NO_LIBPERL=1 
    ...
    ...
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/$ ls -l tools/perf/perf
    -rwxrwxr-x 1 linaro linaro 6276360 Mar  3 10:05 tools/perf/perf

Since the openCSD library is not part of the pert tools, an environment
variable telling the build scripts where to find the library is needed.  If
the `CSTRACE_PATH` variable is not defined the compilation will still be
successful, but handling of CoreSight trace data won't be supported.

At the end of the compilation a new perf binary is available in `tools/perf/`


Trace Decoding with Perf Record
-------------------------------

Before working with custom traces it is suggested to use a trace bundle that
is known to be working properly.  A sample bundle has been made available
here [2].  Trace bundles can be extracted anywhere and have no dependencies on
where the perf tools and openCSD library have been compiled. 

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ mkdir feb24
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ cd feb24
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ wget http://people.linaro.org/~mathieu.poirier/openCSD/uname.v4.user.feb24.tgz
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ md5sum uname.v4.user.feb24.tgz 
    f53f11d687ce72bdbe9de2e67e960ec6  uname.v4.user.feb24.tgz
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ tar xf uname.v4.user.feb24.tgz
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ ls -la
    total 1312
    drwxrwxr-x 3 linaro linaro    4096 Mar  3 10:26 .
    drwxrwxr-x 5 linaro linaro    4096 Mar  3 10:13 ..
    drwxr-xr-x 7 linaro linaro    4096 Feb 24 12:21 .debug
    -rw------- 1 linaro linaro   78016 Feb 24 12:21 perf.data
    -rw-rw-r-- 1 linaro linaro 1245881 Feb 24 12:25 uname.v4.user.feb24.tgz 

Perf is expecting files related to the trace capture (`perf.data`) to be located
under `~/.debug` [3].  This example will remove the current `~/.debug` directory
to be sure everything is clean.  

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ rm -rf ~/.debug 
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ cp -dpR .debug ~/
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/tools/perf/util/cs-etm-decoder/lib
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ ../perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/tools/perf/perf report --stdio 

    # To display the perf.data header info, please use --header/--header-only options.
    #
    #
    # Total Lost Samples: 0
    #
    # Samples: 0  of event 'cs_etm//u'
    # Event count (approx.): 0
    #
    # Children      Self  Command  Shared Object  Symbol
    # ........  ........  .......  .............  ......
    #


    # Samples: 0  of event 'dummy:u'
    # Event count (approx.): 0
    #
    # Children      Self  Command  Shared Object  Symbol
    # ........  ........  .......  .............  ......
    #


    # Samples: 115K of event 'instructions:u'
    # Event count (approx.): 522009
    #
    # Children      Self  Command  Shared Object     Symbol                
    # ........  ........  .......  ................  ......................
    #
         4.13%     4.13%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x0000000000078758
         3.81%     3.81%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x0000000000078e50
         2.06%     2.06%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x00000000000fcaf4
         1.65%     1.65%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x00000000000fcae4
         1.59%     1.59%  uname    ld-2.21.so        [.] 0x000000000000a7f4
         1.50%     1.50%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x0000000000078e40
         1.43%     1.43%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x00000000000fcac4
         1.31%     1.31%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x000000000002f0c0
         1.26%     1.26%  uname    ld-2.21.so        [.] 0x0000000000016888
         1.24%     1.24%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x0000000000078e7c 
         1.24%     1.24%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x00000000000fcab8
    ...

Trace Decoding with Perf Script 
-------------------------------
Working with perf scripts needs more command line options but yields
interesting results.

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ export EXEC_PATH=/home/linaro/coresight/bkk16/perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/tools/perf/ 
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ export SCRIPT_PATH=$EXEC_PATH/scripts/python/ 
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ export XTOOL_PATH=/your/aarch64/toolchain/path/bin/
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ ../perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/tools/perf/perf --exec-path=${EXEC_PATH} script --script=python:${SCRIPT_PATH}/cs-trace-disasm.py -- -d ${XTOOL_PATH}/aarch64-linux-gnu-objdump

              7f89f24d80:   910003e0        mov     x0, sp
              7f89f24d84:   94000d53        bl      7f89f282d0 <free@plt+0x3790>
              7f89f282d0:   d11203ff        sub     sp, sp, #0x480
              7f89f282d4:   a9ba7bfd        stp     x29, x30, [sp,#-96]!
              7f89f282d8:   910003fd        mov     x29, sp
              7f89f282dc:   a90363f7        stp     x23, x24, [sp,#48]
              7f89f282e0:   9101e3b7        add     x23, x29, #0x78
              7f89f282e4:   a90573fb        stp     x27, x28, [sp,#80]
              7f89f282e8:   a90153f3        stp     x19, x20, [sp,#16]
              7f89f282ec:   aa0003fb        mov     x27, x0
              7f89f282f0:   910a82e1        add     x1, x23, #0x2a0
              7f89f282f4:   a9025bf5        stp     x21, x22, [sp,#32]
              7f89f282f8:   a9046bf9        stp     x25, x26, [sp,#64]
              7f89f282fc:   910102e0        add     x0, x23, #0x40
              7f89f28300:   f800841f        str     xzr, [x0],#8
              7f89f28304:   eb01001f        cmp     x0, x1
              7f89f28308:   54ffffc1        b.ne    7f89f28300 <free@plt+0x37c0>
              7f89f28300:   f800841f        str     xzr, [x0],#8
              7f89f28304:   eb01001f        cmp     x0, x1
              7f89f28308:   54ffffc1        b.ne    7f89f28300 <free@plt+0x37c0>
              7f89f28300:   f800841f        str     xzr, [x0],#8
              7f89f28304:   eb01001f        cmp     x0, x1
              7f89f28308:   54ffffc1        b.ne    7f89f28300 <free@plt+0x37c0>

The Linaro CoreSight Team
-------------------------
- Mike Leach
- Tor Jeremiassen
- Chunyan Zang
- Mathieu Poirier


One Last Thing
--------------
We welcome help on this project.  If you would like to add features or help
improve the way things work, we want to hear from you.

Best regards,

*The Linaro CoreSight Team*

--------------------------------------
[1]: https://github.com/Linaro/OpenCSD "OpenCSD Github"

[2]: wget http://people.linaro.org/~mathieu.poirier/openCSD/uname.v4.user.feb24.tgz 
 
[3]: Get in touch with us if you know a way to change this.

Commit message:

opencsd: removing defines when compiling perf
When compiling Perf, the ARCH=arm option is not required since
all the trace decoding solution is confined to tools/perf/util.

Option NO_LIBPERL=1 is also not mandatory but avoiding it can
break compilation on systems where some libraries are missing,
hence adding a comment on the topic.

Signed-off-by: Mathieu Poirier <mathieu.poirier@linaro.org>

HOWTO.md, after:

HOWTO - using the library with perf   {#howto_perf}
===================================

@brief This HOWTO explains how to use `perf` which has integrated openCSD.

#### March 3rd 2016

This HOWTO explains how to use the perf cmd line tools and the openCSD
library to collect and extract program flow traces generated by the 
CoreSight IP block on a Linux system.  The examples have been generated using
a aarch64 Juno-r1 platform.  All information is considered accurate and tested
using library branch `opencsd-bkk16` (decode library only) and perf update 
branch `perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16` (decode library + perf tools) on the 
[OpenCSD github repository][1].


On Target Trace Acquisition
---------------------------
The enhancement to the Perf tools that support the new `cs_etm` pmu have not
been upstreamed yet.  To get the required functionality branch
`perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bbk16` needs to be downloaded to the target system where
traces are to be collected.  This branch is an upstream v4.5-rc6 kernel
supplemented with modifications to the CoreSight framework and drivers to be
usable by the Perf core.  Some of those patches have been queued for merging in
the 4.6 cycle.  Others have been submitted and some have yet to be posted for
review.  The process is being done incrementally.

From there compiling the perf tools with `make -C tools/perf` will yield a
`perf` executable that will support CoreSight trace collection.  Note that if
traces are to be decompressed *off* target, there is no need to download and
compile the openCSD library (on the target).

Before launching a trace run a sink that will collect trace data needs to be
identified.  All CoreSight blocks identified by the framework are registed in
sysFS:


    linaro@linaro-nano:~$ ls /sys/bus/coresight/devices/
    20010000.etf   20040000.main_funnel  22040000.etm 22140000.etm  
    230c0000.A53_funnel  23240000.etm  replicator@20020000 20030000.tpiu
    20070000.etr 220c0000.A57_funnel  23040000.etm  23140000.etm 23340000.etm


CoreSight blocks are listed in the device tree for a specific system and
discovered at boot time.  Since tracers can be linked to more than one sink,
the sink that will recieve trace data needs to be identified manually.  In
In this example the ETR block is selected:

    root@linaro-nano:~# echo 1 > /sys/bus/coresight/devices/20070000.etr/enable_sink


- Note that selecting a trace sink prior to launching a trace run is only
temporary.  Work is currently underway to specify sink selection in the "perf
record" command.

Once a sink has been identify trace collection can start.  An easy and yet
interesting example is the `uname` command:

    linaro@linaro-nano:~/kernel$ ./tools/perf/perf record -e cs_etm// --per-thread uname

This will generate a `perf.data` file where execution has been traced for both
user and kernel space.  To narrow the field to either user or kernel space the
`u` and `k` options can be specified.  For example the following will limit
traces to user space:


    linaro@linaro-nano:~/kernel$ ./tools/perf/perf record -vvv -e cs_etm//u --per-thread uname
    Problems setting modules path maps, continuing anyway...
    -----------------------------------------------------------
    perf_event_attr:
      type                             8
      size                             112
      { sample_period, sample_freq }   1
      sample_type                      IP|TID|IDENTIFIER
      read_format                      ID
      disabled                         1
      exclude_kernel                   1
      exclude_hv                       1
      enable_on_exec                   1
      sample_id_all                    1
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    sys_perf_event_open: pid 11375  cpu -1  group_fd -1  flags 0x8
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    perf_event_attr:
      type                             1
      size                             112
      config                           0x9
      { sample_period, sample_freq }   1
      sample_type                      IP|TID|IDENTIFIER
      read_format                      ID
      disabled                         1
      exclude_kernel                   1
      exclude_hv                       1
      mmap                             1
      comm                             1
      enable_on_exec                   1
      task                             1
      sample_id_all                    1
      mmap2                            1
      comm_exec                        1
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    sys_perf_event_open: pid 11375  cpu -1  group_fd -1  flags 0x8
    mmap size 266240B
    AUX area mmap length 131072
    perf event ring buffer mmapped per thread
    Synthesizing auxtrace information
    Linux
    auxtrace idx 0 old 0 head 0x11ea0 diff 0x11ea0
    [ perf record: Woken up 1 times to write data ]
    overlapping maps:
     7f99daf000-7f99db0000 0 [vdso]
     7f99d84000-7f99db3000 0 /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/ld-2.21.so
     7f99d84000-7f99daf000 0 /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/ld-2.21.so
     7f99db0000-7f99db3000 0 /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/ld-2.21.so
    failed to write feature 8
    failed to write feature 9
    failed to write feature 14
    [ perf record: Captured and wrote 0.072 MB perf.data ]

    linaro@linaro-nano:~/kernel$ ls -l ~/.debug/ perf.data
    _-rw------- 1 linaro linaro 77888 Mar  2 20:41 perf.data

    /home/linaro/.debug/:
    total 16
    drwxr-xr-x 2 linaro linaro 4096 Mar  2 20:40 [kernel.kallsyms]
    drwxr-xr-x 2 linaro linaro 4096 Mar  2 20:40 [vdso]
    drwxr-xr-x 3 linaro linaro 4096 Mar  2 20:40 bin
    drwxr-xr-x 3 linaro linaro 4096 Mar  2 20:40 lib

On Target Trace Collection
--------------------------
The entire program flow will have been recorded in the `perf.data` file.
Information about libraries and executable is stored under `$HOME/.debug` . 
All this information needs to be collected in order to successfully decode
traces off target:

    linaro@linaro-nano:~/kernel$ tar czf uname.trace.tgz perf.data ~/.debug


Note that file `vmlinux` should also be added to the bundle if kernel traces
have also been collected.


Off Target OpenCSD Compilation
------------------------------
As of this writing the openCSD library is not part of the perf tools source.
It is available on [github][1] and needs to be compiled before perf.

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ git clone -b opencsd-bkk16 https://github.com/Linaro/OpenCSD.git opencsd-bkk16
    Cloning into 'OpenCSD'...
    remote: Counting objects: 2063, done.
    remote: Total 2063 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 2063
    Receiving objects: 100% (2063/2063), 2.51 MiB | 1.24 MiB/s, done.
    Resolving deltas: 100% (1399/1399), done.
    Checking connectivity... done.
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ ls opencsd-bkk16 
    decoder LICENSE  README.md

Once the source code has been acquired compilation of the openCSD library can
take place.  For Linux two options are available, LINUX and LINUX64, based on
the host's (which has nothing to do with the target) architecture:

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ cd opencsd-bkk16/decoder/build/linux/
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/opencsd-bkk16/decoder/build/linux/$ ls
    makefile  rctdl_c_api_lib  ref_trace_decode_lib

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/opencsd-bkk16/decoder/build/linux/$ make LINUX64=1 DEBUG=1 
    ...
    ...

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight//bkk16/opencsd-bkk16/decoder/build/linux/$ ls ../../lib/linux64/dbg/
    libcstraced.a  libcstraced_c_api.a  libcstraced_c_api.so  libcstraced.so 

Off Target Perf Tools Compilation
---------------------------------
As stated above not all the pieces of the solution have been upstreamed.  To
get all the components branch `perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16` needs to be
obtained:

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ git clone -b perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16 https://github.com/Linaro/OpenCSD.git perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16
    ...
    ...

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ ls perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/ 
    arch   certs    CREDITS  Documentation  firmware  include  ipc     Kconfig  lib          Makefile  net     REPORTING-BUGS  scripts   sound  usr
    block  COPYING  crypto   drivers        fs        init     Kbuild  kernel   MAINTAINERS  mm        README  samples         security  tools  virt       

At this point openCSD object files needs to be copied in the cs_etm decoder
directory.  After that a new perf tool binary can be compiled:

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ mkdir perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/tools/perf/util/cs-etm-decoder/lib 

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ cp opencsd-bkk16/decoder/lib/linux64/dbg/* perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/tools/perf/util/cs-etm-decoder/lib/

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ cd perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/$ export CSTRACE_PATH=~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/opencsd-bkk16/decoder
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/$ make -C tools/perf
    ...
    ...
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/$ ls -l tools/perf/perf
    -rwxrwxr-x 1 linaro linaro 6276360 Mar  3 10:05 tools/perf/perf

Since the openCSD library is not part of the pert tools, an environment
variable telling the build scripts where to find the library is needed.  If
the `CSTRACE_PATH` variable is not defined the compilation will still be
successful, but handling of CoreSight trace data won't be supported.

When compiling Perf, some perl libraries may not be present on the host system.
Adding the "NO_LIBPERL=1" option will prevent the build script from complaining
too much.

At the end of the compilation a new perf binary is available in `tools/perf/`


Trace Decoding with Perf Record
-------------------------------

Before working with custom traces it is suggested to use a trace bundle that
is known to be working properly.  A sample bundle has been made available
here [2].  Trace bundles can be extracted anywhere and have no dependencies on
where the perf tools and openCSD library have been compiled. 

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ mkdir feb24
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/$ cd feb24
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ wget http://people.linaro.org/~mathieu.poirier/openCSD/uname.v4.user.feb24.tgz
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ md5sum uname.v4.user.feb24.tgz 
    f53f11d687ce72bdbe9de2e67e960ec6  uname.v4.user.feb24.tgz
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ tar xf uname.v4.user.feb24.tgz
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ ls -la
    total 1312
    drwxrwxr-x 3 linaro linaro    4096 Mar  3 10:26 .
    drwxrwxr-x 5 linaro linaro    4096 Mar  3 10:13 ..
    drwxr-xr-x 7 linaro linaro    4096 Feb 24 12:21 .debug
    -rw------- 1 linaro linaro   78016 Feb 24 12:21 perf.data
    -rw-rw-r-- 1 linaro linaro 1245881 Feb 24 12:25 uname.v4.user.feb24.tgz 

Perf is expecting files related to the trace capture (`perf.data`) to be located
under `~/.debug` [3].  This example will remove the current `~/.debug` directory
to be sure everything is clean.  

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ rm -rf ~/.debug 
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ cp -dpR .debug ~/
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/tools/perf/util/cs-etm-decoder/lib
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ ../perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/tools/perf/perf report --stdio 

    # To display the perf.data header info, please use --header/--header-only options.
    #
    #
    # Total Lost Samples: 0
    #
    # Samples: 0  of event 'cs_etm//u'
    # Event count (approx.): 0
    #
    # Children      Self  Command  Shared Object  Symbol
    # ........  ........  .......  .............  ......
    #


    # Samples: 0  of event 'dummy:u'
    # Event count (approx.): 0
    #
    # Children      Self  Command  Shared Object  Symbol
    # ........  ........  .......  .............  ......
    #


    # Samples: 115K of event 'instructions:u'
    # Event count (approx.): 522009
    #
    # Children      Self  Command  Shared Object     Symbol                
    # ........  ........  .......  ................  ......................
    #
         4.13%     4.13%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x0000000000078758
         3.81%     3.81%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x0000000000078e50
         2.06%     2.06%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x00000000000fcaf4
         1.65%     1.65%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x00000000000fcae4
         1.59%     1.59%  uname    ld-2.21.so        [.] 0x000000000000a7f4
         1.50%     1.50%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x0000000000078e40
         1.43%     1.43%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x00000000000fcac4
         1.31%     1.31%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x000000000002f0c0
         1.26%     1.26%  uname    ld-2.21.so        [.] 0x0000000000016888
         1.24%     1.24%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x0000000000078e7c 
         1.24%     1.24%  uname    libc-2.21.so      [.] 0x00000000000fcab8
    ...

Trace Decoding with Perf Script 
-------------------------------
Working with perf scripts needs more command line options but yields
interesting results.

    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ export EXEC_PATH=/home/linaro/coresight/bkk16/perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/tools/perf/ 
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ export SCRIPT_PATH=$EXEC_PATH/scripts/python/ 
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ export XTOOL_PATH=/your/aarch64/toolchain/path/bin/
    linaro@t430:~/linaro/coresight/bkk16/feb24/$ ../perf-opencsd-4.5-rc6-bkk16/tools/perf/perf --exec-path=${EXEC_PATH} script --script=python:${SCRIPT_PATH}/cs-trace-disasm.py -- -d ${XTOOL_PATH}/aarch64-linux-gnu-objdump

              7f89f24d80:   910003e0        mov     x0, sp
              7f89f24d84:   94000d53        bl      7f89f282d0 <free@plt+0x3790>
              7f89f282d0:   d11203ff        sub     sp, sp, #0x480
              7f89f282d4:   a9ba7bfd        stp     x29, x30, [sp,#-96]!
              7f89f282d8:   910003fd        mov     x29, sp
              7f89f282dc:   a90363f7        stp     x23, x24, [sp,#48]
              7f89f282e0:   9101e3b7        add     x23, x29, #0x78
              7f89f282e4:   a90573fb        stp     x27, x28, [sp,#80]
              7f89f282e8:   a90153f3        stp     x19, x20, [sp,#16]
              7f89f282ec:   aa0003fb        mov     x27, x0
              7f89f282f0:   910a82e1        add     x1, x23, #0x2a0
              7f89f282f4:   a9025bf5        stp     x21, x22, [sp,#32]
              7f89f282f8:   a9046bf9        stp     x25, x26, [sp,#64]
              7f89f282fc:   910102e0        add     x0, x23, #0x40
              7f89f28300:   f800841f        str     xzr, [x0],#8
              7f89f28304:   eb01001f        cmp     x0, x1
              7f89f28308:   54ffffc1        b.ne    7f89f28300 <free@plt+0x37c0>
              7f89f28300:   f800841f        str     xzr, [x0],#8
              7f89f28304:   eb01001f        cmp     x0, x1
              7f89f28308:   54ffffc1        b.ne    7f89f28300 <free@plt+0x37c0>
              7f89f28300:   f800841f        str     xzr, [x0],#8
              7f89f28304:   eb01001f        cmp     x0, x1
              7f89f28308:   54ffffc1        b.ne    7f89f28300 <free@plt+0x37c0>

The Linaro CoreSight Team
-------------------------
- Mike Leach
- Tor Jeremiassen
- Chunyan Zang
- Mathieu Poirier


One Last Thing
--------------
We welcome help on this project.  If you would like to add features or help
improve the way things work, we want to hear from you.

Best regards,

*The Linaro CoreSight Team*

--------------------------------------
[1]: https://github.com/Linaro/OpenCSD "OpenCSD Github"

[2]: wget http://people.linaro.org/~mathieu.poirier/openCSD/uname.v4.user.feb24.tgz 
 
[3]: Get in touch with us if you know a way to change this.
